# Identifiers in NMDC

Identifiers are crucial for the NMDC, both for any data objects *created* (aka minted) and for any external objects *referenced*

Examples of entities that require identifiers:

 * Samples
 * Data objects (e.g. sequence files)
 * Taxa (e.g. NCBITaxon or GTDB)
 * Genes, Proteins
 * Sequences (e.g. genome/transcriptome)
 * Ontology terms and other descriptors
     * functional orthologs, e.g. KEGG.orthology (KO) terms
     * pathways, e.g. KEGG.pathway, MetaCyc, GO
     * reactions/activities: KEGG, MetaCyc
     * chemical entities: CHEBI, CHEMBL, INCHI, ...
     * sequence feature types: SO, Rfam

Identifiers should be:

 * Permanent
 * Unique
 * Resolvable
 * Opaque

See [McMurry et al, PMID:28662064](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28662064) for more desiderata.

## CURIEs - prefixed IDs

Following McMurry et al we adopt the use of *prefixed identifiers*

The syntax is:

    Prefix:LocalId

Examples:

 - GO:0008152
 - BIOSAMPLE:SAMEA2397676
 - DOI:10.1038/nbt1156

These prefixed identifiers are also known as CURIEs (Compact URIs). There is a [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/curie) for these

All prefixes should be registered with a standard identifier prefix system. These include:

 * http://n2t.net
 * http://identifiers.org
 * http://obofoundry.org

## Examples

### INSDC BioSamples

Registry entry: https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/biosample

Example ID/CURIE: BIOSAMPLE:SAMEA2397676

Resolving via identifiers.org: [https://identifiers.org/BIOSAMPLE:SAMEA2397676](https://identifiers.org/BIOSAMPLE:SAMEA2397676)

Resolving via nt2.net: [http://n2t.net/BIOSAMPLE:SAMEA2397676](http://n2t.net/BIOSAMPLE:SAMEA2397676)

### GOLD identifiers

https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/gold

Example ID: `GOLD:Gp0119849`

Resolving via identifiers.org: https://identifiers.org/GOLD:Gp0119849

### identifiers for ontology terms and function descriptors

Most of the ontologies we use are in OBO. All OBO IDs are prefixed
using the ontology ID space. The list of ID spaces can be found on
http://obofoundry.org

For example the ID/CURIE `ENVO:00002007` represents the class `sediment` and is expanded to a URI of http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ENVO_00002007

#### KEGG

KEGG is actually a set of databases, each with its own prefix, usually of form `KEGG.$database`, e.g.

 * [KEGG.ORTHOLOGY](https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/kegg.orthology) (aka KO), e.g. KEGG.ORTHOLOGY:K00001
 * [KEGG.COMPOUND](https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/kegg.compound), e.g. KEGG.COMPOUND:C12345

## Recommended IDs for use within NMDC

The NMDC schema is annotated with the set of IDs that are allowed to act as primary keys for instances of each class.

For example the class [OrthologyGroup](https://microbiomedata.github.io/nmdc-metadata/docs/OrthologyGroup) has a description of the IDs allowed on the class web page, the first listed is [KEGG.ORTHOLOGY](https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/kegg.orthology)

The underlying yaml looks like this:


```
  orthology group:
    is_a: functional annotation term
    description: >-
      A set of genes or gene products in which all members are orthologous
    id_prefixes:
      - KEGG.ORTHOLOGY  ## KO number
      - EGGNOG
      - PFAM
      - TIGRFAM
      - SUPFAM
      - PANTHER.FAMILY
    exact_mappings:
      - biolink:GeneFamily
```

The full URLs for each is in the jsonld context file

## IDs minted for use within NMDC

The NMDC offers a central identifier minting service, as an endpoint within the NMDC runtime API which is accessible [here](https://api.dev.microbiomedata.org/docs#/identifiers/mint_ids_ids_mint_post). The endpoint helps generate identifiers for NMDC _entities_ like biosamples, studies, etc.

The [NMDC Schema](../schema/nmdc.yaml) specifies legal identifiers for all of its classes. All instances/records that are intended for upload into the NMDC metadata store must have an `id` field that follows the specification discussed below.

The typical structure of an NMDC-minted identifier would look like below:

```
nmdc:<type-code>-<shoulder>-<blade><.version><_locus>
```

There are six parts to the above identifier:

1. `nmdc`: A prefix before the colon (`:`) in the above identifier structure which specifies that the identifier is an NMDC-specific identifier generated by an identifier minting service.

2. `<type-code>`: An alphabetical code that is part of a recognized and controlled set. Type codes help us answer the question about the *type of entities* we are identifying. It is required that type codes to have all lowercase, alphabetical codes, and recommended for them to be of length three characters or more, but less than or equal to six characters. There always has to be a 1:1 mapping between the typecodes and the classes in the schema. The *type code* portion of the identifier follows the regular expression: `[a-z]{1,6}`.

3. `<shoulder>`: A string designed to serve as usernames for ID minting authorities. These authorities are typically organizations like EMSL, or JGI and hence shoulders would be assigned to organizations only. The shoulder helps us answer the question about the *authority that is minting* the NMDC identifier. All shoulders will be zero to six character alphabetical codes flanked with a digit on either side. The central minting service would have a unique shoulder code of its own. Similarly, other site-specific offline minting stewards assigned by NMDC, would also have their own unique shoulder codes which help ensure that even offline, we are always generating locally unique keys. The regular expression for the *shoulder* portion of the identifier is: `[0-9][a-z]{0,6}[0-9]`.

4. `<blade>`: The fully unique part of the identifier under a given type code and shoulder namespace. The _shoulder_ and _blade_ together make up the _key_ of the identifier. The blade is an alphanumeric string of open-ended length with at least one character, following the regular expression: `[A-Za-z0-9]{1,}`.

5. `<.version>`: The *version* portion of the identifier is used to indicate the version of the workflow run on the sample. It differentiates multiple iterations of a workflow. The delimiter used to separate the *version* from the *blade* and everything before it is a dot (`.`). The *version* is at least a one character alphanumeric string of open-ended length with one or more dots indicating subversions. The regular expression pattern that the *version* conforms to is: `(\.[A-Za-z0-9]{1,})*`.

6. `<_locus>`: The _locus_ component is indicative of the contig on which a genomic feature is found, along with the start and end coordinates. The intra component delimiter that is used to separate coordinates of the *locus* is underscore (`_`). The *locus* is an alphanumeric string composed of one or more characters which can include upper and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters underscore (`_`), dot (`.`) and hyphen (`-`). The regular expression that the locus will follow is: `_[A-Za-z0-9_\.-]+`.

The regular expression pattern that all identifiers must follow is as below:

```
^(?<prefix>nmdc):(?<typecode>[a-z]{1,6})-(?<shoulder>[0-9][a-z]{0,6}[0-9])-(?<blade>[A-Za-z0-9]{1,})(?<version>(\.[A-Za-z0-9]{1,})*)(?<locus>_[A-Za-z0-9_\.-]+)?$
```

Notes:

* The reason why we would want to have shoulders uniquely identifying minting authorities is to accommodate a decentralized, or distributed ID minting service implementation. Meaning, one organization, say LBL which hosts the central ID minting service which is assigned a type code of `00` generates some NMDC IDs. In a similar fashion, another organization, say JGI, might want to have an offline ID minting service within their organization that also generates NMDC IDs. So organizations like the JGI, would be assigned a shoulder by the NMDC, say, `01` to identify the organization. Similarly, we can generate different shoulder ids for different organizations that want to use offline NMDC ID minting services.
* The above identifier structure applies to ids minted by the central minting service hosted by LBL, as well as offline id minting services that may be setup at trusted organizations.

## Reuse vs minting new IDs

We try to reuse IDs as far as possible. For example, for any sample already in GOLD, we use the GOLD sample identifier, e.g. GOLD:Gb.....

## IDs generated during workflows

This section is in  progress. See https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-metadata/issues/195

All instances of [OmicsProcessing](https://microbiomedata.github.io/nmdc-metadata/docs/OmicsProcessing) have IDs. The policy for ID depends on the provider.

Currently metagenomics omics objects look like this:

```yaml
      id: "gold:Gp0108335"
      name: "Thawing permafrost microbial communities from the Arctic, studying carbon transformations - Permafrost 712P3D"
      has_input: 
        - "gold:Gb0108335"
      part_of: 
        - "gold:Gs0112340"
      has_output: 
        - "jgi:551a20d30d878525404e90d5"
      omics_type: Metagenome
      type: "nmdc:OmicsProcessing"
      add_date: "30-OCT-14 12.00.00.000000000 AM"
      mod_date: "22-MAY-20 06.13.12.927000000 PM"
      ncbi_project_name: "Thawing permafrost microbial communities from the Arctic, studying carbon transformations - Permafrost 712P3D"
      processing_institution: "Joint Genome Institute"
      principal_investigator_name: "Virginia Rich"
```

note that we use re-using the GOLD ID rather than minting a new one

the linked data object uses a jgi prefix and an md5 hash

```yaml
      id: "jgi:551a20d30d878525404e90d5"
      name: "8871.1.114459.GCCAAT.fastq.gz"
      description: "Raw sequencer read data"
      file_size_bytes: 17586370657
      type: "nmdc:DataObject"
```

note that currently jgi is not registered and thus the ID is not resolvable

Currently metaproteomics omics objects look like this:

```yaml
      id: "emsl:404590"
      name: "FECB_21_5093B_01_23Dec14_Tiger_14-11-12"
      description: "High res MS with low res CID MSn"
      part_of: 
        - "gold:Gs0110132"
      has_output: 
        - "emsl:output_404590"
      omics_type: Proteomics
      type: "nmdc:OmicsProcessing"
      instrument_name: "VOrbiETD03"
      processing_institution: "Environmental Molecular Sciences Lab"
```

this is suboptimal; `emsl` is not yet registered, and it's not clear that the integer is unique within emsl, let alone the nmdc subset

the output data objects are formed from these:

```yaml
      id: "emsl:output_404590"
      name: "output: FECB_21_5093B_01_23Dec14_Tiger_14-11-12"
      description: "High res MS with low res CID MSn"
      file_size_bytes: 503296678
      type: "nmdc:DataObject"
```

the data objects use hashes (md5) prefixed with nmdc:

```yaml
      name: "404590_resultant.tsv"
      description: "Aggregation of analysis tools{MSGFplus, MASIC} results"
      file_size_bytes: 10948480
      type: "nmdc:DataObject"
      id: "nmdc:e0c70280a7a23c7c5cc1e589f72e896e"
```

note nmdc is not yet registered

Both metaG and metaT analyses produce GFF3 files. See [issue 184](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-metadata/issues/184) for more on how the GFF is modeled.

The main entity we care about in these is the [gene product] https://microbiomedata.github.io/nmdc-metadata/docs/GeneProduct) ID (usually a protein), this is what functional annotation hangs off. 

This is typically a protein encoded by a CDS, e.g.

```
Ga0185794_41    GeneMark.hmm-2 v1.05    CDS     48      1037    56.13   +       0       ID=Ga0185794_41_48_1037;translation_table=11;start_type=ATG;product=5-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine deaminase;product_source=KO:K12960;cath_funfam=3.20.20.140;cog=COG0402;ko=KO:K12960;ec_number=EC:3.5.4.28,EC:3.5.4.31;pfam=PF01979;superfamily=51338,51556
```

Currently we are prefixing the ID field in GFF with `nmdc`, e.g. `nmdc:Ga0185794_41_48_1037` as the protein ID

When converting col9 we ensure that each ID is correctly prefixed. So for example, we use `KEGG.OTHOLOGY:K12960` not `KO:K12960` as the former is the official prefix according to KEGG and identifiers.org

We will also later need a policy for IDs for the sequences in col1 (ie genome or transcript), please return later for more details...


## MIxS term identifiers

We are working with the GSC to provide permanent IDs for MIxS terms. Note these terms are schema-level rather than data-level.

Please check this section later

For now we place these in the nmdc namespaces, e.g

`nmdc:alt`

## Identifier mapping

Please check this section later

## Identifiers and semantic web URIs

We produce a JSON-LD context with the schema:

 * [jsonschema/nmdc.context.jsonld](jsonschema/nmdc.context.jsonld)

When this is combined with schema-conformant JSON, RDF can be automatically created using the intended URIs
